Throughout this module, you'll deep dive on several different search techniques, but it can be useful to have a mental model of the overall system. With that in mind, let's start this module with a high-level look at a retriever's architecture and how each component within it works together. When a rack system receives your prompt, it's first sent to the retriever. The retriever will have access to the knowledge base, which you can think of as just a bunch of text files sitting in a database. The retriever needs to quickly decide which documents are most relevant to the prompt and return them so they can be passed to the LLM. Most modern retrievers use two different search techniques as a part of this process. The first is a more traditional keyword search. This means the retriever looks for documents that contain the exact words found in the prompt. This approach is time-tested and has powered information retrieval systems for decades. The second approach is a semantic search. This means the retriever looks for documents that have a similar meaning to the prompt. This approach makes the retriever more flexible as it allows it to find documents that are relevant to the prompt but might not contain the exact words the user included in their prompt. Each search technique will be used to return a collection of documents, perhaps 20-50 documents each. Usually, there will be many documents that appear in both lists, but because the style of search is different, they might be ranked higher in one than the other. At this point, each list is filtered down based on their metadata. For example, some documents in your knowledge base may be relevant to members of your engineering team and others are more relevant to people working in HR. The system would know what team the user is a member of and apply a metadata filter at this point to ensure only the documents relevant to that department are allowed to move forward. Now the retriever has two filtered lists, one generated with a keyword search and the other with a semantic search. These two lists are now combined to create a final ranking of the most relevant documents. The retriever returns the top-ranked documents from this final list and at this point the retrieval is complete. The documents are sent along to be added to the augmented prompt. This style of search is called hybrid search because it relies on multiple techniques to produce its final document ranking. Each technique provides benefits that contribute to the overall performance of the retriever. Keyword search ensures the system is sensitive to the exact words the user included in the prompt. Semantic search gives the system more flexibility to find documents whose meaning is similar to the prompt, even if they don't use the same words. Metadata filtering allows the system to exclude documents based on rigid criteria in a way that neither of the other approaches allows. Designing a high-performing retriever means understanding the relative strengths of each of these techniques and then tuning the balance between them to align with the needs of your project. With that in mind, let's start diving in on each of these three techniques, beginning with the simplest of the three, metadata filtering.