An embedding model's job is fairly simple to describe. It needs to embed similar text to vectors that are close to one another, and dissimilar text to vectors that are further apart. If you try to imagine how embedding models actually do this, you'll realize just how sophisticated they need to be. How could a computer possibly understand the meaning of a piece of text? Let's look a little closer at how embedding models achieve this incredible feat. You can think of the job of the embedding model in terms of positive and negative pairs. A positive pair is two pieces of similar text, like good morning and hello, which should be embedded close together. A negative pair, like good morning and that's a noisy trombone, have dissimilar meanings, and should be embedded further apart. Embedding models need to work so that positive pairs end up closer together, and negative pairs end up farther apart. The first step to training an embedding model is compiling a large collection of positive and negative pairs, also called examples. In many systems, this means truly massive data collections, often with multi-millions of pairs included. An individual word or piece of text will be included in many examples to capture its relationship to a wide variety of texts and concepts. Once these examples have been compiled, training can begin. At the beginning of training, embedding models embed each piece of text to a random vector. These vectors are nonsense, and will have no relationship to the text's meaning. If you use this untrained embedding model for retrieval, the results would be gibberish. Now the model looks at all the positive and negative pairs in its training data, and asks how well did I place the positive pairs together and the negative pairs apart. Since the model is using the contrast provided by the positive and negative examples to evaluate its performance, this technique is called contrastive training. Based on how well it did, the model updates its internal parameters. It uses an algorithm that attempts to move positive pairs closer together and negative pairs further apart. Once the embedding model's parameters are updated, you just repeat the process. Text is embedded to new vectors using the model's updated parameters. The model's performance is again evaluated using the positive and negative pairs, and based on that performance, its parameters are again updated. This process is repeated many times, iteratively updating the model's parameters, pushing and pulling pairs closer together or further apart. After many rounds of training, the positive pairs will have been pulled close together, and the negative pairs should have been pushed far apart. Let's look at this process from the perspective of a single piece of text. The phrase, he could smell the roses, which I'll call our anchor point, it is in a positive pair with the phrase, a field of fragrant flowers, and a negative pair with the phrase, a lion roared majestically. At the beginning of training, these three phrases are mapped to random locations with no reflection of their meaning. From the anchor's perspective, it wants to pull the positive example closer, and it wants to push the negative example further apart. With just three pieces of text, this process is pretty simple to visualize. After many rounds of training, the anchor wants to pull the positive example as close as it can, and push the negative example as far away as possible. That said, you'd never train an embedding model with just two pairs. When you try to complete this process with millions of anchor, positive, and negative points, the process gets a lot messier. Every vector is simultaneously being pushed and pulled in many directions. This helps explain why models use vectors with hundreds or even thousands of dimensions. High dimensional space gives the algorithm a lot of options for where to push and pull vectors to reflect the nuanced relationships in the training data. After training, the vectors capture meaning because similar words or text have been pulled to similar areas of the vector space. You don't need to train an embedding model to build a rack system, but understanding how they're trained can help you better understand the vectors they generate. The main point to know are that semantic vectors are abstract and somewhat random. Before training, a location in space doesn't have any meaning, and vectors are placed randomly. After training, different locations in space do have a semantic meaning, but only because that's where a cluster of similar concepts is formed. For example, somewhere there can be a cluster of words that all have to do with lions, and another cluster that has to do with trombones. If you ran the training process twice, but with different initial random vectors, these same clusters would still form, but they would be at different locations in the vector space. Another key takeaway is that you only compare vectors generated by the same embedding model. Each model was trained with different training data, different numbers of dimensions, and with different randomly initialized values. Trying to compare vectors from two different models will just result in nonsense. In practice, you'll likely use off-the-shelf embedding models, and they'll do a remarkably good job of placing similar words, sentences, or documents at similar locations in vector space. You probably won't even implement the distance measurements between these vectors. That said, understanding a bit more deeply how they work can help you better reason about how to use them in your RAG system, so join me in the next video to see how you can put these dense vectors to use in your retriever.