As you just saw, the core idea of RAG is to pair an off-the-shelf LLM with a knowledge base of information it might not have had access to when it was trained. Many LLM-powered systems implement this model, so let's explore a few of them now. One important application of RAG is for code generation. This is significant because while language models have been trained on lots of code, conceivably every public Git repository, generating correct code for a specific project requires specialized information. The LLM needs to know the classes, functions, and definitions in the project, as well as the overall coding style being used. Building a RAG system that uses your own code base as the knowledge base makes this information available to an LLM. By retrieving relevant classes, definitions, and files from your repository, an LLM is much better able to generate code or answer questions relevant to your project. Another major application is customizing chatbots to an individual company. Every company has its own products, policies, and communication guidelines. Treating these enterprise documents as a knowledge base allows you to deploy LLMs in a variety of useful ways. You could build a customer service chatbot that knows information about your company's product, current inventory, or common troubleshooting steps. You could deploy an internal chatbot that accurately answers questions about company policies or directs you towards useful documentation. In either case, the knowledge base helps ground the LLM's responses in your company's specific products or policies, and helps minimize instances where the LLM generates generic or misleading responses. RAG has significant applications in healthcare and legal domains. In these instances, the knowledge base might contain legal documents from a particular case, text from recently published medical journals, and so forth. In fields like these, in which precision is imperative and the amount of niche and potentially private information is vast, a RAG-based approach might be the only way to deploy an LLM-based product that is sufficiently accurate and uses private information. Another major application is an AI-assisted web search. Historically, search engines have worked like a retriever. Given a search query, they return relevant websites. Today, search engines will provide AI summaries of these search results to quickly present the most useful information in a skimmable way. These AI web summaries are basically a RAG system whose knowledge base is the entire internet. While large-scale RAG systems can be powerful, the same is true for highly personalized ones. Personalized assistants in your text messages, email client, word processor, calendar, and so forth are now able to help you send messages, organize your schedule, draft documents, and complete projects big and small. In each case, the more context the LLM has about the project you're working on, the better they're able to support that work. In these cases, the knowledge base might be relatively small. For example, your text messages, contact lists, emails, or a folder of documents. These kinds of documents are dense with important context. So a RAG system with access to this small-scale personal information can complete tasks in a way that is significantly more relevant to what you're doing. As you can see, the RAG model has applicability in a wide variety of contexts. Many companies, organizations, and even you have collections of information that could be used to enhance the quality of text generated by an LLM. Whenever you have access to information that likely wasn't used to train a large-language model, there is a potential for building a useful RAG application. They might even allow LLMs to be used in contexts that were otherwise impossible. As you continue through this course, hopefully you'll start seeing opportunities in your work and life where a RAG approach would be useful. For now though, join me in the next video and let's dive deeper into the architecture of a RAG system.