Metadata filtering is the most straightforward and likely the most familiar technique used inside of a retriever. Let's have a look at how it's used, and what particular benefits it brings to how the retriever works. Metadata filtering uses rigid criteria to narrow down the documents returned by a retriever, based on the document's metadata. This metadata might be information, like a document's title, author, creation date, access privileges, and so forth. Here's a simple example of how it works. Suppose you work at a newspaper, and want to build a retriever for articles written over the history of your paper. The knowledge base would contain thousands of different articles. Each article is tagged with multiple pieces of metadata, including its title, the date the article was published, the author of the article, which section of the newspaper the article appeared in, and so forth. While the full text of each article lives somewhere in the knowledge base, the system can only search for articles based on this metadata. Querying this kind of index looks a lot like writing a SQL query. If you only filtered based on one piece of metadata, you could find every article published on a given day, or even every article written by a particular author. You could also write more complex queries and filter on multiple pieces of metadata. For example, you could find all of the articles written for the opinion section between June and July of 2024 by your favorite journalist. Only articles that meet every condition would be returned, and the rest of the articles would be filtered out. If you've ever filtered a table in a spreadsheet, you've already done metadata filtering. You're just using a strict set of criteria to determine which members of a larger collection of data you want to use. Inside of a typical RAG system, you won't use metadata filtering to perform retrieval, but rather to help narrow down results returned by other retrieval techniques. The filters themselves also usually aren't determined by what the user said in the prompt, but rather other attributes of the user making the request. For example, consider the newspaper example from before. Say some of your articles are published freely to the open internet, and others can only be accessed by paid subscribers. Each article could have a piece of metadata storing whether it is a free or paid article. When a user searches the database, the system can detect whether they're signed in as a paid subscriber. If not, then a metadata filter would be set to exclude paid articles from search results. Similarly, if your newspaper prints articles in many regions of the world, each article could have a piece of metadata storing the region where the article was published. When a reader queries the system, you can detect in which region they're located and only return articles from their region. Metadata filtering has a number of advantages. Firstly, it's conceptually simple, making it easy to understand how the system works and debug issues. Second, it's a fast, mature, and well-optimized approach. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, it's the only approach that allows your system to decide whether documents are retrieved based on rigid criteria. If you want to strictly define what kinds of documents should or should not be included in the retrieval, metadata filtering is the only approach that can give you that behavior. That said, metadata filtering has significant limitations. It's not really a search technique, so much as it is a tool for refining the results of the other two techniques you'll see in this module. It's overly rigid, ignores a document's content, and lacks any way of ranking documents once they've passed the filter. While it's very likely that RAG systems you build will include metadata filters of some kind, building a retriever that relied exclusively on metadata filtering would be essentially useless. Metadata filtering is simple and effective, but needs to be paired with other search techniques in order to provide real value. In particular, you'll need a way to determine if a document's contents are actually relevant to your prompt. So join me in the next video to see how keyword search addresses some of these needs.